---
layout: post
title: "Loot Boxes and Gambling"
date: 2017-11-17 18:38:00 -0600
---

There’s a bit of a debate going on now on whether or not loot crates are gambling, courtesy of EA and Star Wars Battlefront II. Many arguments hinge on laws on gambling and how they exist now instead of looking at loot crates, how can can be implemented (and are in Battlefront II) and if those laws should be changed. I think it’s a dangerous stance to take, since gambling, and the laws that regulate it, are both defined by humans. We should look at new situations as they arise, assess them, and determine if this new situation should be considered gambling.

According to [Kotaku](https://kotaku.com/esrb-says-it-doesnt-see-loot-boxes-as-gambling-1819363091), the ESRB’s stance on loot boxes is that they are not gambling because, despite being based on random chance, you always receive something. If we were to take this with slot machines, it wouldn’t hold up. Simply giving out candy and stickers for every spin wouldn’t keep them from being regulated. They also compare it to trading card games, which is fair, but I believe there is still a huge difference between the two that should be considered. With trading cards, there is a second hand market where their monetary value is determined, which is itself an inherent limiter in how much money someone might spend on booster packs in hopes of getting a specific card. It’s easy to see you’ll spend much more on random chance than if you bought the card individually. Since the possibility of acquiring individual cards without relying on booster packs exist, it’s easier to see when booster packs aren’t worth it. Games with loot boxes don’t have such a system in place, and if they do, the currency you buy these items with is either acquired through more loot boxes, or bought with real money.

This brings me to my next point. Star Wars Battlefront II was designed as a $60 gacha game (though at the time of writing, EA and DICE have opted to “temporarily” disable microtransactions). If you haven’t heard of them, they are based on gachapon, which is basically the Japanese version of capsule vending machines for small toys you often see at grocery stores. This relates to gaming in that similar setup is often used for monetizing mobile games in Japan. In fact, our loot boxes are just western versions of these gacha schemes. You use some in game currency to open a box, or summon heroes, or hatch eggs. What makes them notable is the way progression is tied to the gacha items. It usually involves combining similar items to upgrade the base item. But for every level, the amount of resources grows exponentially. The resources you get from playing for free are limited, and it is all designed around getting players to spend money so they can upgrade as quickly as possible. Gacha type games have already been scrutinized, regulated, and sometimes outright banned in some countries for being amazingly predatory. Battlefront II has a similar setup. All progress is gated through loot boxes. Sure, there’s credits, and a sort of crafting mechanic (you can use crafting parts to obtain star cards), but the game is designed so that most of your resources come from loot boxes. They even limit the amount of rewards you can get offline, which is very much what a free to play mobile game would do.

There’s nothing inherently wrong with loot boxes and gacha. They can even be fun in the right situations, but they are being abused by companies in order to wring their customers dry just like casinos can do with gambling. A major point of contention with loot boxes as gambling seems to be that winning money is not possible. It’s not, and shouldn’t be, about winning money, which seems to be a key contention on the gambling argument. The focus should be on about how the system could be abused to trick people into spending more money than they otherwise would, and that’s exactly how they are designed and implemented. As it stands, an argument could be made that  worse than gambling. If you get the jackpot at the slots you’ll leave with a hefty sum of money. Anything you win with loot boxes will die with the game, and that could be only a few short years with the cycle these iterative games are on. Even if they are not defined as gambling in the end, loot boxes need to be regulated to keep them from being predatory and anti-consumer.
